# July 2012 Log

## 08 July
A new attempt at a blog format. This totally isn't a thing that I do all the time.

Since I last made attempts to keep a log of my doings, I've acquired ideas for research topics that are more specific than any other I've had since I started this fool's errand nearly three years ago. It started with realizing that embodiment was a pretty keen idea, but it is, of course, not enough to chant "embodied cognition" and expect to solve the Synthetic Minds Problem (roughly stated: how can we make one?). Embodiment was an idea I got turned onto in May, but it wasn't until a couple weeks ago that I became taken with understanding sensorimotor dynamics. I'm convinced that sensorimotor business is hugely important for perception (the sensor that moves itself!), especially spatial perception. The work I'm looking at now is Lungarella and Sporns 2006 and some earlier work by Lungarella et al on "information self-structuring" which claims to show that considering motor interaction along with sensory input has information theoretic benefits. I haven't looked in detail since I'm still brushing up on my information theory, but I'm alarmed in that I didn't see much followup work to this (as determined by clicking "Cited by" in google scholar and skimming article titles/abstracts). It might be an insight but it's clearly not enough, so I need to find another direction to move in after this.

One thing I've been somewhat fixated on is understanding proprioception and especially the vestibular system. My (mostly uninformed) hunch is that both are essential to spatial perception in vertebrates. I'm torn on how much biomechanics is needed, despite my affinity for the "embodiment" insight. It's probably totally critical for understanding sensorimotor neuroscience (the motor signals are commands to a biomechanical machine, so it makes sense that you need to understand the biomechanics). However, it's not clear that modelling a realistic musculoskeletal system would provide insights to spatial perception that modelling some crappy artificial robot limbs would not. Maybe animal-like spatial perception needs the intricately controlled and flexible limbs that evolution has gifted us. Hrnm.

Current focus is Elements of Information Theory by Cover and a paper on "Transfer Entropy", since the latter is a major measure used in the 2006 paper. I'm also making a notes page on information theory to help me retain this better (I've definitely read chapter 2 of Cover before and then forgot most of it, but IIRC that was during my post-bachelors SIUC days when I wasn't so great at learning).
~                                                                                            
